## 设计模式
按照设计意图分类
| 意图   | 模式                                                         |
| ------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| 接口型 | 适配器模式、外观模式、合成模式、桥接模式                     |
| 职责型 | 单例模式、观察者模式、调停者模式、代理模式、职责链模式、享元模式 |
| 构造型 | 构建者模式、工厂方法模式、抽象工厂模式、原型模式、备忘录模式 |
| 操作型 | 模板方法模式、状态模式、策略模式、命令模式、解释器模式       |
| 扩展型 | 装饰器模式、迭代器模式、访问者模式                           |

### creational
Factory
>Define an interface for creating an object,but let subclasses decide which class to instantiate.Factory Method lets a class defer instantiate to subclasses.

Abstract Factory
>Provide an interface for creating families of related or denpendent objects,without specifying concrete class.

Builder
>Separate the construction of a complex object from its respresentation,so that the same construction process can create different respresentations.

Prototype
>Specifying the kinds of objects to create using a prototypical instance,and create new objects by copying this prototype.

Singleton
>Ensure a class only has one instance,and provide a global porint of access to it.
### structional
Adapter
>Convert the interface of a class into another interface clients expect.Adapter lets classes work together that couldn't otherwise because of incompatible interface.

Bridge
>Decouple an abstraction from its implementation so that the two can vary independently.

Composite
>Compose object into tree structure to represent part-whole hierarchies.Composite lets client treat individual objects and compositions of objects uniformly.

Decorator
>Attach additional responsibility to an object dynamically.Decorators provides a flexible alternative to subclassing for extending functionlity.

Facede
>Provide a unified interface to a set of interfaces in a subsystem.Fecade defines a high-level interface that makes subsystem easier to use.

Flyweight
>Use sharing to support large numbers of fine-grained objects efficietly.

Proxy
>Provide a surrogate or placeHolder for another object to control access to it.

### behavioral
Interprete
>Given a language,define a representation for its grammer along with an interpreter that uses hte representation to interprete sentences in the language.

Template
>Define the skeleton of an algorithm in an operation, deferring some steps to subclasses.Template Method lets subclasses redefine certain steps of an algorithm without charging the algorithm's structure.

Chain of Responsibility
>Avoid coupling the sender of a request to its receiver by givingmore than one object a chance to handle the request. Chain the receiving objects and pass the request along the chain until an objeect handles it.

Command
>Encapsulate a request as an object, there by letting you parameterize clients with different request, queue or log request, and support undoable operations.

Interator
>Provide a way to access the elements of an aggregate object sequentially without exposing its underlying respresentation.  

Mediator
>Define an object that encapsulates how a set of objects interact. Mediator promotes loose coupling by keeping objects from referring to each other explicitly, and it lets you vary their interaction indenpendently.

Memento
>Without violation encapsulating,capture and externalize an objects internal state so that the object can be restored to this state later.

Observer
>Define a one-to-many dependency between objects so that when one object changes state, all its dependents are notified ande updated automatically.

State
>Allow an o object to alter its behavior when its internal state changes.The object will appear to change its class.

Strategy
>Define a family of algorithm, encapsulate each one, and make them interchangeable.Strategy lets the algorithm vary independenty from clients that use it.

Visitor
>Represent an operation to be performed on the elements of an object sstructure.Visitor lets you define a new opreation without changing the classes of the elements on which it operates.



软件设计原则  
单一设计原则（SRP,Single Responsibility Principle）  
开闭原则（OCP,Open Close Principle）  
里氏替换原则（LSP,Liskow Substitution Principle）  
依赖倒置原则（DIP,Dependence Inversion Principle）  
接口隔离原则（ISP,Interface Segregation Principle）  
迪米特原则（LOD,Law of Detemer）  
-组合优于继承  
-委托